atre: putratayā purā tvamanasūyāyāṃ hi dattābhidho
jāta: śiṣyanibandhatandritamanā: svasthaścaran kāntayā |
dṛṣṭo bhaktatamena hehayamahīpālena tasmai varā-
naṣṭaiśvaryamukhān pradāya daditha svenaiva cānte vadham ||1||
atre: putratayā	as the son of the sage Atri
purā tvam-	long ago, Thou
anasūyāyāṃ hi	to Anasooyaa indeed
datta-abhidha: jāta:	as Dattatreya was born
śiṣya-nibandha	by Thy disciples' pesterings
tandrita-manā:	mentally tired
svastha:-caran kāntayā	(Thou) peacefully moved about with Thy wife
dṛṣṭa: bhaktatamena	seen by the great devotee,
hehaya-mahīpālena tasmai	the king of Hehayaa, (Kaartaviryaarjuna), to him
varān-aṣṭa-aiśvarya-mukhān	the boons of the eight Sidhis
pradāya daditha	giving, also gave
svena-eva	by thyself alone
ca-ante vadham	in the end, death
Long ago Thou were born as Dattatreya to the sage Atri and Anasooyaa. Mentally tired by the pesterings of Thy various disciples, Thou wandered about with Thy wife immersed in blissful peace. Thus Thou were seen by the great devotee Kaartaviryaarjuna, the king of Hehaya. Pleased, Thou bestowed on him all psychic powers consisting of the eight Sidhis and also promised him death at Thy hands in the end.
satyaṃ kartumathārjunasya ca varaṃ tacchaktimātrānataṃ
brahmadveṣi tadākhilaṃ nṛpakulaṃ hantuṃ ca bhūmerbharam |
sañjāto jamadagnito bhṛgukule tvaṃ reṇukāyāṃ hare
rāmo nāma tadātmajeṣvavaraja: pitroradhā: sammadam ||2||
satyaṃ kartum-	to fulfill
atha-arjunasya ca varaṃ	and then the boon given to Kaartviryaarjuna
tat-śakti-mātrā-nataṃ	(who were) just a little bit subdued by his valour alone
brahnadveṣi tat-akhilaṃ	who were impious, that whole
nṛpakulaṃ hantuṃ	the clan of kings to kill
ca bhūme:-bharam	and (who were) burden to the earth
sañjāta: jamadagnita:	(Thou) were born of Jamadagni
bhṛgukule	in the line of Bhrigus
tvaṃ reṇukāyāṃ	Thou to Renuka
hare	O Lord!
rāma: nāma	by the name Raama
tat-ātmajeṣu	among his (Jamadgni,s) sons
avaraja:	as the youngest
pitro:-adhā: sammadam	to the parents gave great joy
To fulfill the boon given to Kaartaviryaarjuna, Thou were born to Jamadagni and Renuka in the line of the Bhrigus, by the name Raama. Thou were the youngest among Jamadagni's sons and gave Thy parents great joy. Thy purpose to be born as Raama was also to kill the whole clan of kings who were very impious and were a burden on the earth, and were partly held in check only by Kaartaviryarjuna's valour.
labdhāmnāyagaṇaścaturdaśavayā gandharvarāje manā-
gāsaktāṃ kila mātaraṃ prati pitu: krodhākulasyājñayā |
tātājñātigasodarai: samamimāṃ chitvā'tha śāntāt pitu-
steṣāṃ jīvanayogamāpitha varaṃ mātā ca te'dādvarān ||3||
labdha-āmnāyagaṇa:-	gaining (the knowledge of) all the Vedas
caturdaśa-vayā	by the age of fourteen
gandharvarāje	in Gandharva king (Chitraratha)
manāk-āsaktāṃ kila	a little bit attached, indeed
mātaraṃ prati	Thy mother, towards her
pitu: krodha-ākulasya-ājñayā	by Thy greatly enraged father's command
tāta-ājñātiga-sodarai:	who did not carry out the father,s command, Thy brothers
samam-imāṃ chitvā-	along with them, her cutting off
atha śāntāt pitu:	then, who had calmed down, Thy father, from him
teṣāṃ jīvana yogam-āpitha varaṃ	their life, to be restored requested the boon
mātā ca	and Thy mother also
te-adāt-varān	gave Thee boons
By the age of fourteen years Thou acquired the knowledge of the Vedas. Thy father was greatly enraged with Thy mother who was a little bit attached to the Gandharva king Chitraratha. By the command of Thy father Thou cut of Thy mother's head and also of Thy brothers' as they had failed to carry out the same order of Thy father. After Thy father had calmed down, as a boon from him, Thou got to restore them to life. Thy mother also being pleased gave Thee boons.
pitrā mātṛmude stavāhṛtaviyaddhenornijādāśramāt
prasthāyātha bhṛgorgirā himagirāvārādhya gaurīpatim |
labdhvā tatparaśuṃ taduktadanujacchedī mahāstrādikaṃ
prāpto mitramathākṛtavraṇamuniṃ prāpyāgama: svāśramam ||4||
pitrā mātṛmude	by Thy father, for Thy mother's pleasure
stava-āhṛta-	by prayer was brought
viyat-dheno:-	the heavenly cow (Kaamdhenu)
nijāt-āśramāt	from Thy aashrama
prasthāya-atha	setting out then,
bhṛgo:-girā	on Bhrigu's words
himagirau-ārādhya gaurīpatim	in the Himaalayaas, worshipping Shiva
labdhvā-tat-paraśuṃ	got his battle axe
tat-ukta-danuja-chedī	by him pointed out, that asura (Thou) killed
mahā-astrādikaṃ prāpta:	various divine missiles having got
mitram-atha-	as a friend
akṛt-vraṇa-muniṃ	Akrit-vrana sage
prāpya-agama: sva-āśramam	getting, went to Thy aashrama
To please Thy mother Renuka, Thy father Jamadagni, brought by prayer the heavenly cow Kaamdhenu to his aashrama. On the advice of Bhrigu, Thou set out from Thy aashrama to the Himaalayaa and worshipped Shiva. Thou were bestowed with his battle-axe and other various divine missiles, and killed the asura pointed out by him.Then making friends with sage Akritvrana, Thou returned to Thy aashrama.
ākheṭopagato'rjuna: suragavīsamprāptasampadgaṇai-
stvatpitrā paripūjita: puragato durmantrivācā puna: |
gāṃ kretuṃ sacivaṃ nyayuṅkta kudhiyā tenāpi rundhanmuni-
prāṇakṣepasaroṣagohatacamūcakreṇa vatso hṛta: ||5||
ākheṭa-upagata:-arjuna:	for hunting who had come, Kaartaveeryaarjuna,
suragavī-samprāpta-sampadgaṇai:-	by the celestial cow getting the various riches
tvat-pitrā paripūjita:	by Thy father well entertained
pura-gata: durmantri-vācā	returned to his town, by the ill advice
puna: gāṃ kretuṃ	again, the cow to buy
sacivaṃ nyayuṅkta	appointed his minister
kudhiyā tena-	by the evil minded him
api rundhan-	even as he was obstructing
muni-prāṇa-kṣepa	the sage was killed
saroṣa-go-	the enraged cow
hata-camū-cakreṇa	killed (by the soldiers emerging from her) the whole army
vatsa: hṛta:	(but) the calf was stolen
The king Kiraatarjuna came hunting to the forest and was treated well by Thy father with the riches and luxuries obtained from the celestial cow Kaamadhenu. When the king returned to his town, he was ill advised by his ministers to buy the cow. The king sent an emissary for the purpose and as Thy father, the sage tried to resist his taking away of the cow, he was killed. Several warriors emerged from the furious divine cow and destroyed the whole army. But the calf was stolen.
śukrojjīvitatātavākyacalitakrodho'tha sakhyā samaṃ
bibhraddhyātamahodaropanihitaṃ cāpaṃ kuṭhāraṃ śarān |
ārūḍha: sahavāhayantṛkarathaṃ māhiṣmatīmāviśan
vāgbhirvatsamadāśuṣi kṣitipatau samprāstuthā: saṅgaram ||6||
śukra-ujjīvita	by Shukra (who was) brought back to life
tāta-vākya	by Thy father's words
calita-krodha:-atha	Thou whose anger increased,then
sakhyā samaṃ vibhrat	with Thy friends shining
dhyāta-mahodara-upanihitaṃ	meditated upon Mahodara, (from him) brought
cāpaṃ kuṭhāraṃ śarān	bow, battle-axe and arrows
ārūḍha: saha-vāha-yantṛka rathaṃ	boarding, with horses and the charioteer the chariot
māhiṣmatīm-āviśan	Maahishmati entering
vāgbhi:-vatsam-	by words, the calf
adāśuṣi kṣitipatau	did not give back, when the king
samprāstuthā: saṅaram	started the battle
Thy father was brought back to life by Shukraachaarya. When Thy father related the whole incident Thou were very angry. With Thy friend Akritavrana Thou meditated upon Mahodara who then equipped Thee with bow, arrows and the battle axe. Boarding the chariot with the horses and the charioteer, Thou entered Maahishmati. Even when the king was requested, he did not give the calf back, Thou started the battle.
putrāṇāmayutena saptadaśabhiścākṣauhiṇībhirmahā-
senānībhiranekamitranivahairvyājṛmbhitāyodhana: |
sadyastvatkakuṭhārabāṇavidalanniśśeṣasainyotkaro
bhītipradrutanaṣṭaśiṣṭatanayastvāmāpatat hehaya: ||7||
putrāṇām-ayutena	with sons ten thousand sons
saptadaśabhi:-ca-akṣauhiṇībhi:-	and seventeen Akshauhini (armies)
mahā-senānībhi:-	great commanders
aneka-mitra-nivahai:-	and numerous friends
vyājṛmbhita-āyodhana:	fiercely fighting the battle
sadya:-tvatka-	soon by Thy
kuṭhāra-bāṇa-vidalan-	battle-axe and arrows destroying
niśśeṣa-sainya-utkara:	(whose) entire army
bhīti-pradruta-	of fear who had fled
naṣṭa-śiṣṭa-tanaya:	and so were saved from being killed, with these left over sons
tvām-āpatat	Thee attacked
hehaya:	the king of Hehaya, i.e., Kartaveeryaarjuna
Kaartveerya with his ten thousand sons and seventeen Akshauhini armies and numerous friends and great commanders fiercely fought the battle. Soon by Thy battle axe and arrows the entire army was destroyed and all his sons were killed except those who had fled in fright. The king of Hehaya then attacked Thee.
līlāvāritanarmadājalavalallaṅkeśagarvāpaha-
śrīmadbāhusahasramuktabahuśastrāstraṃ nirundhannamum |
cakre tvayyatha vaiṣṇave'pi viphale buddhvā hariṃ tvāṃ mudā
dhyāyantaṃ chitasarvadoṣamavadhī: so'gāt paraṃ te padam ||8||
līlā-vārita	cleverly impounded
narmadā jala	the river Narmadaa's waters
valat	almost drowning (by releasing the waters suddenly)
laṅkeśa-garva-apaha-	Raavana, and his pride destroying
śrīmat-	O! Thyself
bāhu-sahasra-mukta	by his thousand arms who wielded
bahu-śastra-astraṃ	innumerable weapons
nirundhan-amum	blocking him ((Kaartveeryaarjuna)
cakre tvayi-atha	the discus used on Thee, then
vaiṣṇave-api viphale	even the Vaishnava (discus) was powerless
buddhvā hariṃ tvām	knowing Thee as Hari
mudā dhyāyantaṃ	with joy, meditating
chita-sarva-doṣam-	(he whose) all sins were purified
avadhī: sa:-agāt	Thou killed, and he went
paraṃ te padam	to Thy Supreme abode
Kaartaveerya had once with his thousand arms cleverly impounded the waters of the river Narmadaa, and almost drowning Raavana had destroyed his pride who was meditating on the banks downstream. That Kaartaveerya, wielded various weapons with those thousand arms and finding the Vaishnava discus also powerless against Thee, knew Thee to be Hari, and with joy meditated upon Thee. Then, he whose sins were purified, was killed by Thee and he went to Thy Supreme abode.
bhūyo'marṣitahehayātmajagaṇaistāte hate reṇukā-
māghnānāṃ hṛdayaṃ nirīkṣya bahuśo ghorāṃ pratijñāṃ vahan |
dhyānānītarathāyudhastvamakṛthā vipradruha: kṣatriyān
dikcakreṣu kuṭhārayan viśikhayan ni:kṣatriyāṃ medinīm ||9||
bhūya:-amarṣita-	thereafter greatly angered
hehaya-ātmaja-gaṇai:-	by the king of Hehaya's sons
tāte hate	(when) Thy father was killed
reṇukām-āghnānāṃ hṛdayaṃ	Renuka was beating her breast
nirīkṣya bahuśa:	seeing many times
ghorāṃ pratijñāṃ vahan	taking a terrible vow
dhyāna-ānīta-	by meditation brought
ratha-āyudha:-tvam-akṛthā	chariot and weapons Thou made
vipra-druha: kṣatriyān	the enemies of Brahmins, the Kshatriyas
dik-cakreṣu kuṭhārayan	in all the quarters fighting with battle axe
viśikhayan ni:kṣatriyām	rendering devoid of Kshatriyaas
medinīm	the earth
Thereafter the sons of the king of Hehaya were in great rage and killed Thy father. Grieved at this Thy mother Renuka was wailing and beating her breast many times, seeing this Thou took a terrible vow. Thou then got the chariot and weapon by meditation and fought against the Kshatriyaas who were enemies of the Brahmins. With the battle axe Thou killed the Kshatriyaas in all the quarters and rendered the earth devoid of them.
tātojjīvanakṛnnṛpālakakulaṃ trissaptakṛtvo jayan
santarpyātha samantapañcakamahāraktahṛdaughe pitṛn
yajñe kṣmāmapi kāśyapādiṣu diśan sālvena yudhyan puna:
kṛṣṇo'muṃ nihaniṣyatīti śamito yuddhāt kumārairbhavān ||10||
tāta-ujjīvanakṛt-	Thy father reviving
nṛpālaka-kulaṃ	the tribe of Kshatriyaas
tri:-sapta-kṛtva: jayan	thrice seven times (21) defeating
santarpya-atha	performing tarpana then
samanta-pañcaka-mahārakta-hṛdaughe	in Samant-Panchaka, the vast lake of blood,
pitṛn yajñe	to the ancestors , in sacrifice
kṣmām-api kāśyapa-ādiṣu	the land also, to Kaashyapa and other Rishis
diśan sālvena yudhyan puna:	giving away, with Saalva fighting again
kṛṣṇa:-amum-nihaniṣyati-	Krishna will kill him
iti śamita: yuddhāt	thus restrained from the fight
kumārai: bhavān	by the Sanat kumaaras, Thou (were)
Thy father was revived and Thou defeated the clan of kings twenty one times. Thou then performed tarpana to the ancestors in the vast lake of blood named Samant Panchaka. In the sacrifice Thou also gave away land to Kaashyapa and other Rishis. Thou fighting again with Saalva, refrained, on being restrained by Sanata Kumaars who told Thee that he was destined to be killed by Krishna.
nyasyāstrāṇi mahendrabhūbhṛti tapastanvan punarmajjitāṃ
gokarṇāvadhi sāgareṇa dharaṇīṃ dṛṣṭvārthitastāpasai: |
dhyāteṣvāsadhṛtānalāstracakitaṃ sindhuṃ sruvakṣepaṇā-
dutsāryoddhṛtakeralo bhṛgupate vāteśa saṃrakṣa mām ||11||
nyasya-astrāṇi	abandoning all weapons
mahendra-bhūbhṛti	on the Mahendra mountain
tapa:-tanvan	penance performing
puna:-majjitāṃ	thereafter submerged
gokarṇa-avadhi	up to Gokarna
sāgareṇa dharaṇīṃ dṛṣṭvā-	by the sea, the earth seeing
arthita:-tāpasai: dhyāta-	requested by the sages by meditation
iṣvāsa-dhṛta-anala-astra-	the bow bearing the fire missile
cakitaṃ sindhum	the frightened ocean
sruva-kṣepaṇāt-	by the throwing of the ladle
utsārya-uddhṛta-kerala:	pushing back, scooped out Kerala
bhṛgupate vāteśa	O! Bhrigupati (Parashuraama), the Lord of Guruvaayur!
saṃrakṣa mām	protect me
Abandoning all weapons, Thou resorted to the Mahendra mountain for meditation, practicing penance. Finding the land up to Gokarna submerged in the sea, on the request of the sages, who meditated upon Thee, Thou frightened the ocean with the bow bearing fire missile. By throwing a sacrificial ladle Thou pushed back the sea and scooped out the land of Kerala. O Bhrigupati Parashuraama! The Lord of Guruvaayur! Deign to protect me.